Pd 758 core s 3 to minio plugin tutorial (#2291)
truenas/documentation: content/CORETutorials/JailsPluginsVMs/Plugins/MinIOPlugin.md

{{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioPluginConsole.png" alt="MinIO Console" id="MinIO Console" >}}

## Migrating from S3 Service to Minio Plugin

After completing the initial install of the Minio plugin, users with an existing S3 service deployment need to migrate S3 data from the previous service deployment to the new plugin.
Migrating from the built-in S3 service to the Minio plugin could require an extended service window.

{{< enterprise >}}
Beginning in CORE 13.0-U6, Enterprise customers with the S3 service running or enabled are prevented from upgrading to the next major version.

TrueNAS Enterprise customers are strongly encouraged to contact iXsystems Support for assistance with the migration process.

{{< expand "Contacting Support" "v" >}}
{{< include file="content/_includes/iXsystemsSupportContact.md" >}}
{{< /expand >}}
{{< /enterprise >}}

### Migration Overview
Users with the S3 service enabled must upgrade CORE to version **13.0-U6** and complete the migration process **before** upgrading to a later major version.

> The migration path involves [installing a MinIO Client](#installing-the-minio-client) (`mc`) release with the required feature and function support to migrate the S3 service deployment.

Reviewer: In this instance mc is not a command, it is used as part of a command but not in this instance so the emphasis is incorrect. 
```suggestion
The migration path involves [installing a MinIO Client](#installing-the-minio-client) (MC) release with the required feature and function support to migrate the S3 service deployment.
```

Next [configure the Minio plugin](#configuring-the-minio-plugin-for-migration) deployment and then [migrate data](#migrating-data) from the MinIO S3 service deployment to it.

After migrating data, you can either create an archive of the TrueNAS S3 service or delete it.

### Installing the MinIO Client

> The [MinIO Client](https://min.io/docs/minio/linux/reference/minio-mc.html) (`mc`) is command line tool with support for both filesystems and S3-compatible cloud storage services.

Reviewer: mc is still not a command in this instance/discussion
```suggestion
The [MinIO Client](https://min.io/docs/minio/linux/reference/minio-mc.html) (MC) is a command line tool with support for both filesystems and S3-compatible cloud storage services.
```

> Install `mc` to facilitate data the migration.

Reviewer: still not a command in this instance.
```suggestion
Install the MC to facilitate data the migration.
```

Versions are available for Windows, Linux, and Mac.

This tutorial uses the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), but any standard Linux distribution follows the same process.
Users should be familiar with WSL or the standard Linux CLI interface.

{{< hint type=important >}}
Installed MinIO client software version must be between **RELEASE.2022-06-26T18-51-48Z** and **RELEASE.2022-10-29T10-09-23Z**.

> Newer or older versions will not work properly.

Reviewer: never use will
```suggestion
Newer or older versions do not work properly.
```

{{< /hint >}}

> To install the most recent compatible version of `mc`, enter:

Reviewer: again, this is not a command in this instance it is a program/application/client.
```suggestion
To install the most recent compatible version of  MC, enter:
```

```
curl https://dl.min.io/client/mc/release/linux-amd64/archive/mc.RELEASE.2022-10-29T10-09-23Z \
  --create-dirs \
  -o $HOME/minio-binaries/mc

chmod +x $HOME/minio-binaries/mc
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/minio-binaries/
```

{{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioClientInstall.png" alt="MinIO Client Installed" id="MinIO Client Installed" >}}

> After installation completes, enter `mc --version` to confirm the compatible `mc` version is installed.

Reviewer: mc is not a command
```suggestion
After installation completes, enter `mc --version` to confirm the compatible MC version is installed.
```

### Configuring the Minio Plugin for Migration

> Due to incompatibility between versions, `mc` is unable to export configuration data from the S3 service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to incompatibility between versions, MC is unable to export configuration data from the S3 service.
```

Manual configuration of the Mino plugin is needed to enable data migration.

> 1. If you have not done so, configure the network ports for the Minio plugin.

Reviewer: Starting with the action for steps is a best practice
```suggestion
1. Configure the network ports for the MinIO plugin if you have not done so.
```

>     a. Go to **Jails** and locate the jail matching the **Jail Name** entered during [installation of the Minio plugin](#installing-the-minio-plugin).

Reviewer: in this instance, is **Jail Name** specifically referring to the UI field? it reads like a general reference to the jail name. We need to avoid mixing up mentions of the noun with the UI as it gets confusing. 
```suggestion
    a. Go to **Jails** and locate the jail matching the jail name entered during [installation of the MinIO plugin](#installing-the-minio-plugin).
```
You can use the UI field here but in the context of saying matching the name entered in **Jail Name** on the **Create Jail** screen. or something like this. don't mix up the noun and UI mentions.

        {{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioPluginJail.png" alt="Jails Screen" id="Jails Screen" >}}

    b. Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Expand">chevron_right</i> to expand details and management options.

    c. Click <i class="fa fa-stop" aria-hidden="true" title="Stop"></i>&nbsp;**STOP** to stop the jail before making any changes.

    d. Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Edit">edit</i>&nbsp;**EDIT** to open the **Jails / Edit** screen. Then click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Expand">chevron_right</i>&nbsp;to expand **Network Properties**.
        {{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioPluginPortForwarding.png" alt="Network Properties NAT Port Forwarding" id="Network Properties NAT Port Forwarding" >}}

    e. Edit the **Host Port Number** values to use any currently unused ports.

>         The Minio plugin must use different ports than the S3 service, which uses 9000 and 9001 by default.

Reviewer: maybe this as a more definitive instruction. Do we tell them why they should not use the default ports?
```suggestion
       Do not use the MinIO plugin default ports 9000 and 90001. You must use different ports than the S3 service, 
```

        Before selecting port numbers, refer to [Default Ports](https://www.truenas.com/docs/references/defaultports/).
        Record the ports used for the Minio plugin.

    f. Click **Save**

> 2. Ensure that the destination dataset created in [First Steps](#first-steps) is mounted on the Minio Plugin, and not the dataset used for the S3 service.

Reviewer: Why is MinIO Plugin init capped? Is that the proper noun name for this? If yes the init caps are okay, if it is a screen name put it in bold. Also, I suggest this:
```suggestion
2. Mount the new dataset created in the [First Steps](#first-steps) section as the destination dataset on the Minio Plugin. Do not use the S3 service dataset.
```

Author: Per discussion with Tim, I'm mirroring the UI by referring to the "Minio Plugin" but using MinIO as the proper noun for MinIO itself.

>     a. Go to **Plugins** and locate the installed Minio plugin or go to **Jails** and locate the jail matching the **Jail Name** entered during [installation of the Minio plugin](#installing-the-minio-plugin).

Reviewer: same comments as above. Emphasis and init caps are inconsistently used which leads to confusion for the reader.
```suggestion
    a. Go to **Plugins** and locate the installed Minio plugin or go to **Jails** and locate the jail matching the jail name entered during [installation of the Minio plugin](#installing-the-minio-plugin).
```

    b. Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Expand">chevron_right</i> to expand Minio details and management options.

    c. Click <span class="material-icons">device_hub</span>&nbsp;**MOUNT POINTS** and ensure configured mount point matches the destination dataset you created in [First Steps](#first-steps).
        If needed, follow the instructions in [Setting Up Jail Storage]({{< relref "SettingUpJailStorage.md" >}}) to mount the destination dataset.

> 3. Use the **MinIO Console** to recreate the configuration settings from the S3 service MinIO deployment in the Minio plugin deployment.

Reviewer: is MinIO Console the UI name for this? if not, you don't need bold.

Author: it is

    a. Go to the MinIO web UI portal for the S3 service deployment and note existing configuration settings including users, groups, access keys, and all other MinIO settings.

    b. Go to **Plugins** and locate the installed Minio plugin or go to **Jails** and locate the jail matching the **Jail Name** entered during [installation of the Minio plugin](#installing-the-minio-plugin).

    c. Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Expand">chevron_right</i> to expand Minio details and management options.

    d. Click <span class="material-icons">play_arrow</span>&nbsp;**START** to start the plugin (if needed) and then click <span class="material-icons">settings</span>&nbsp;**MANAGE** to go to the **MinIO Console** and log in.

    e. Configure MinIO settings in the new deployment to match those of the existing deployment.

> 4. Use the **MinIO Console** to manually recreate data buckets from the existing S3 service deployment in the Minio Plugin, including rules, versioning, quotas, and locks.

Reviewer: same question about MinIO Console, is this the UI name or just the proper noun? if the product name init caps are fine, if talking about the UI screen name, use bold but if not talking about a screen name don't use bold. 
Second inconsistent use of init caps on Minio plugin. the plugin is not a proper noun if it is a UI screen then put it in bold.

>     Bucket names do not need to be identical for this process, but your workflow may benefit from using identical names.

Reviewer: incorrect use of may
```suggestion
    Bucket names do not need to be identical for this process, but your workflow can benefit from using identical names.
```

### Migrating Data

> After installing and configuring the Minio plugin and installing the MinIO Client (`mc`), begin migrating data.

Reviewer: mc is not a command in this instance
```suggestion
After installing and configuring the Minio plugin and installing the MinIO Client (MC), begin migrating data.
```

1. From the Linux or WSL command line, enter the command `mc alias set NEWALIAS PATH ACCESSKEY SECRETKEY` for both the origin MinIO service deployment and the destination Minio plugin deployment.

    {{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioClientSetAlias.png" alt="MinIO Client Set Alias" id="MinIO Client Set Alias" >}}

2. Enter `mc mirror --preserve --watch SOURCE/BUCKET TARGET/BUCKET` to begin copying data to the Minio plugin deployment.

    {{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioClientMirror.png" alt="MinIO Client Mirror" id="MinIO Client Mirror" >}}

>     The `mc mirror` operation with the `--watch` flag does not end when the transfer is completed, as it continually looks for new files added to the source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The `mc mirror` operation with the `--watch` flag does not end when the transfer completes, as it continually looks for new files added to the source.
```

    The transfer rate also does not reach 0, as it is an average throughout the operation.

> 3. Verify the transfer has completed successfully by comparing bucket size and items through the web UI of each deployment.

Reviewer: past tense
```suggestion
3. Verify the transfer completed successfully by comparing bucket size and items through the web UI of each deployment.
```
I'm questioning why this is a step in this process when it is just more clarification of step 2 action. You can rewrite this and step 4 as continuation of step 2.

Author: Will address the numbering comment in a future commit

    **Usage** size may vary slightly due to rounding differences between versions, but the total number of objects should be the same.

    {{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioPluginVerifyBuckets.png" alt="Compare Buckets to Verify Completion" id="Compare Buckets to Verify Completion" >}}

4. Use <kbd>CTRL+C</kbd> to end the `mc mirror` operation.
5. Go to **Services** and toggle the **RUNNING** S3 service to **STOPPED**.

> 6. If needed, edit the Minio plugin to reflect the correct port numbers using the process in [Configuring the Minio Plugin for Migration](#configuring-the-minio-plugin-for-migration), step one.

Reviewer: Why is this a step if it is not needed? If it is optional then  just say it is optional. If they need to check this then drop the "if needed" from the step and make the action the first part of the step.
```suggestion
6. Edit the Minio plugin to reflect the correct port numbers using the process in [Configuring the Minio Plugin for Migration](#configuring-the-minio-plugin-for-migration), step one.
```

7. Configure access keys and secret keys for the Minio plugin deployment with any services using MinIO as a data storage target.
    Monitor and verify that the new deployment is operating properly.
8. (Optional) Delete the original dataset from the S3 service deployment.

>     If storage capacity allows, we suggest retaining an archive the original dataset, at least until you have confirmed that the plugin deployment is fully functional.

Reviewer: I think you can combine line 207 and 208.
```suggestion
    If storage capacity allows, we suggest retaining an archive the original dataset, at least until you have confirmed that the plugin deployment is fully functional. After confirming full functionality, delete the original dataset from the S3 Service deployment.
```

{{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioPluginInstalled.png" alt="Minio Plugin Installed" id="Minio Plugin Installed" >}}

Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Expand">chevron_right</i> to expand the **Minio** plugin details and management options.

Click <i class="fa fa-stop" aria-hidden="true" title="Stop"></i>&nbsp;**STOP** to stop the jail before making any changes.

Click <span class="material-icons">device_hub</span>&nbsp;**MOUNT POINTS** and follow the instructions in [Setting Up Jail Storage]({{< relref "SettingUpJailStorage.md" >}}) to mount the destination dataset you created in [First Steps](#first-steps).

Click <span class="material-icons">play_arrow</span>&nbsp;**START** to restart the plugin and then click <span class="material-icons">settings</span>&nbsp;**MANAGE** to go to the **MinIO Console** and log in.

{{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioPluginConsole.png" alt="MinIO Console" id="MinIO Console" >}}

## Migrating from S3 Service to Minio Plugin

After completing the initial install of the **Minio** plugin, users with an existing S3 service deployment need to migrate S3 data from the previous service deployment to the new plugin.

> Migrating from the built-in S3 service to the **Minio** plugin could require an extended service window.

Reviewer: Is this an incomplete thought? What does "could require an extended service window" mean? Is this about how long migration can take? If yes, this can be more clear here.

{{< enterprise >}}
Beginning in CORE 13.0-U6, Enterprise customers with the S3 service running or enabled are prevented from upgrading to the next major version.

TrueNAS Enterprise customers are strongly encouraged to contact iXsystems Support for assistance with the migration process.

{{< expand "Contacting Support" "v" >}}
{{< include file="content/_includes/iXsystemsSupportContact.md" >}}
{{< /expand >}}
{{< /enterprise >}}

### Migration Overview
Users with the S3 service enabled must upgrade CORE to version **13.0-U6** and complete the migration process **before** upgrading to a later major version.

> {{< hint type=danger title="Replacing Access Keys" >}}

Reviewer: This hint is not in active voice present tense. Please reword this content.

Reconfigure or redeploy any connected solutions to replace the previous (now defunct) key pair with the new access and secret keys before proceeding with the migration process.
{{< /hint >}}

The migration path involves [installing a MinIO Client](#installing-the-minio-client) (MC) release with the required feature and function support to migrate the S3 service deployment.

Next [configure the **Minio** plugin](#configuring-the-minio-plugin-for-migration) deployment and then [migrate data](#migrating-data) from the MinIO S3 service deployment to it.

After migrating data, you can either create an archive of the TrueNAS S3 service or delete it.

### Installing the MinIO Client

The [MinIO Client](https://min.io/docs/minio/linux/reference/minio-mc.html) (MC) is a command line tool with support for both filesystems and S3-compatible cloud storage services.
Install MC to facilitate data the data migration.
Versions are available for Windows, Linux, and Mac.

This tutorial uses the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), but any standard Linux distribution follows the same process.
Users should be familiar with WSL or the standard Linux CLI interface.

{{< hint type=important >}}

> Installed MinIO client software version must be between **RELEASE.2022-06-26T18-51-48Z** and **RELEASE.2022-10-29T10-09-23Z**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install MinIO client software version between **RELEASE.2022-06-26T18-51-48Z** and **RELEASE.2022-10-29T10-09-23Z**.
```

Newer or older versions do not work properly.
{{< /hint >}}

To install the most recent compatible version of MC, enter:

```
curl https://dl.min.io/client/mc/release/linux-amd64/archive/mc.RELEASE.2022-10-29T10-09-23Z \
  --create-dirs \
  -o $HOME/minio-binaries/mc

chmod +x $HOME/minio-binaries/mc
export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/minio-binaries/
```

{{< trueimage src="images/CORE/13.0/MinioClientInstall.png" alt="MinIO Client Installed" id="MinIO Client Installed" >}}

After installation completes, enter `mc --version` to confirm the compatible MC version is installed.

### Configuring the Minio Plugin for Migration

Due to incompatibility between versions, MC is unable to export configuration data from the S3 service.

> Manual configuration of the **Minio** plugin is needed to enable data migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manually configure the **Minio** plugin to enable data migration.
```

        Before selecting port numbers, refer to [Default Ports](https://www.truenas.com/docs/references/defaultports/).
        Record the ports used for the Minio plugin.

    f. Click **Save**

2. Ensure that the destination dataset created in [First Steps](#first-steps) is mounted on the Minio Plugin, and not the dataset used for the S3 service.

    a. Go to **Plugins** and locate the installed Minio plugin or go to **Jails** and locate the jail matching the **Jail Name** entered during [installation of the Minio plugin](#installing-the-minio-plugin).

    b. Click <i class="material-icons" aria-hidden="true" title="Expand">chevron_right</i> to expand Minio details and management options.

    c. Click <span class="material-icons">device_hub</span>&nbsp;**MOUNT POINTS** and ensure configured mount point matches the destination dataset you created in [First Steps](#first-steps).
        If needed, follow the instructions in [Setting Up Jail Storage]({{< relref "SettingUpJailStorage.md" >}}) to mount the destination dataset.

3. Use the **MinIO Console** to recreate the configuration settings from the S3 service MinIO deployment in the Minio plugin deployment.

>     a. Go to the MinIO web UI portal for the S3 service deployment and note existing configuration settings including users, groups, access keys, and all other MinIO settings.

Reviewer 2: One thing that may be worth mentioning is that the secret key portion of an access key cannot be viewed after initial creation. 

If a customer had been using the S3 service for sometime, they may have a number of clients already configured to use a specific access key/secret key combo in conjunction with the S3 service as a storage target . If they did not record/save their access key/secret key, there is a possibility they will also need to reconfigure any clients using MinIO as a target with new access keys/secret keys. If they saved all of their key pairs they should be able to input them, but in worse case scenario they may have to configure a number of other devices/services that were using the S3 service as a storage target with new keypairs before it can properly communicate with the new MinIO plugin deployment.

Potentially not worth listing that out in its entirety, but it is definitely something support should be aware of, otherwise they may assist with migration to current MinIO and end up severing communication to MinIO until clients are configured with new key pairs.
